Micrometer to OpenTelemetry Bridge (#43831)
quarkusio/quarkus: docs/src/main/asciidoc/telemetry-micrometer-to-opentelemetry.adoc

////
This guide is maintained in the main Quarkus repository
and pull requests should be submitted there:
https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/tree/main/docs/src/main/asciidoc
////
[id=telemetry-micrometer-opentelemetry]
= Micrometer and OpenTelemetry extension
include::_attributes.adoc[]
:extension-status: preview
:diataxis-type: reference
:categories: observability
:summary: Guide to send Micrometer data to OpenTelemetry.
:topics: observability,opentelemetry,metrics,micrometer,tracing,logs
:extensions: io.quarkus:quarkus-micrometer-opentelemetry

This extension provides support for both `Micrometer` and `OpenTelemetry` in Quarkus applications. It streamlines integration by incorporating both extensions along with a bridge that enables sending Micrometer metrics via OpenTelemetry.

include::{includes}/extension-status.adoc[]

[NOTE]
====
- The xref:telemetry-micrometer.adoc[Micrometer Guide] is available for detailed information about the Micrometer extension.
- The xref:opentelemetry.adoc[OpenTelemetry Guide] provides information about the OpenTelemetry extension.
====

> The bridge is more than the simple OTLP registry found in Quarkiverse. In this extension, the OpenTelemetry SDK provides a Micrometer registry implementation.

Reviewer: I find it odd to start the docs with this phrase. Wouldn't it make sense to start by describing what this extension enabled and then have a note explaining how this is different from the existing Quarkiverse extension?

Author: You are right. This start is not user centric. Will improve.

> This allows the normal use of the Micrometer API, but have the metrics handled by the OpenTelemetry extension. All the configurations of the OpenTelemetry extension are available for this bridge and enables forwarding to OpenTelemetry all the automatic instrumentation metrics generated by Micrometer in Quarkus, as well as custom user metrics.

Reviewer: > This allows the normal use of the Micrometer API, but have the metrics handled by the OpenTelemetry extension

What exactly does this mean? I don't really underastand just by reading this intro

Author: Will add an example to illustrate the idea.

The bridge is based on the https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-java-instrumentation/tree/main/instrumentation/micrometer/micrometer-1.5/library[`micrometer/micrometer-1.5`] OpenTelemetry instrumentation library.

== Usage

If you already have your Quarkus project configured, you can add the `quarkus-micrometer-opentelemetry` extension to your project by running the following command in your project base directory:

:add-extension-extensions: micrometer-opentelemetry
include::{includes}/devtools/extension-add.adoc[]

This will add the following to your build file:

[source,xml,role="primary asciidoc-tabs-target-sync-cli asciidoc-tabs-target-sync-maven"]
.pom.xml
----
<dependency>
    <groupId>io.quarkus</groupId>
    <artifactId>quarkus-micrometer-opentelemetry</artifactId>
</dependency>
----

[source,gradle,role="secondary asciidoc-tabs-target-sync-gradle"]
.build.gradle
----
implementation("io.quarkus:quarkus-micrometer-opentelemetry")
----

== Configuration

> Micrometer is enabled by default as are OpenTelemetry tracing, metrics and logs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When the extension is present, Micrometer is enabled by default as are OpenTelemetry tracing, metrics and logs.
```

OpenTelemetry metrics auto-instrumentation for HTTP server and JVM metrics are disabled by default because those metrics are already collected by Micrometer.

> Particular automated metrics are not enabled by default and can be enabled by setting the, as an example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Specific automated metrics are not enabled by default and can be enabled by setting the, for example example:
```

Reviewer: It would also be nice to know exactly what is not enabled

Author: All of them. The Micromenter extension requires explicit activation of automated metrics.
Will clarify.

For this and other properties you can use with the extension, Please refer to:

* xref:telemetry-micrometer.adoc#configuration-reference[Micrometer metrics configurations]
* xref:opentelemetry.adoc#configuration-reference[OpenTelemetry configurations]

== Metric differences between Micrometer and OpenTelemetry

=== API differences
The metrics produced with each framework follow different APIs and the mapping is not 1:1.

One fundamental API difference is that Micrometer uses a https://docs.micrometer.io/micrometer/reference/concepts/timers.html[Timer] and OpenTelemetry uses a https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/otel/metrics/data-model/#histogram[Histogram] to record latency (execution time) metrics and the frequency of the events.

When using the `@Timed` annotation with Micrometer, 2 different metrics are https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-java-instrumentation/blob/324fdbdd452ddffaf2da2c5bf004d8bb3fdfa1dd/instrumentation/micrometer/micrometer-1.5/library/src/main/java/io/opentelemetry/instrumentation/micrometer/v1_5/OpenTelemetryTimer.java#L31[created on the OpenTelemetry side], one `Gauge` for the `max` value and one `Histogram`.

> The `DistributionSummary` from Micrometer is transformed into a `histogram` and a `DoubleGauge` for the `max` value. If slos are set in the `DistributionSummary` an addition histogram is created for them.

Reviewer: `slos`?

Author: Will clarify.

This table shows the differences between the two frameworks:

|===
|Micrometer |OpenTelemetry

|DistributionSummary
|`<Metric name>` (Histogram), `<Metric name>.max` (DoubleGauge)

|DistributionSummary with SLOs
|`<Metric name>` (Histogram), `<Metric name>.max` (DoubleGauge), `<Metric name>.histogram` (DoubleGauge)

|LongTaskTimer
|`<Metric name>.active` (ObservableLongUpDownCounter), `<Metric name>.duration` (ObservableDoubleUpDownCounter)

|Timer
|`<Metric name>` (Histogram), `<Metric name>.max` (ObservableDoubleGauge)
|===

=== Semantic convention differences

> The 2 frameworks follow different semantic conventions and approaches to the concept. The OpenTelemetry metrics are based on the https://opentelemetry.io/docs/concepts/semantic-conventions/[`OpenTelemetry Semantic Conventions`] and are still under active development. Micrometer metrics convention format is around for a long time and has not changed much.

Reviewer: > to the concept

What concept?

Author: rephrased

|`http.server.connections.active` (LongSum), `http.server.connections.duration` (DoubleGauge)
| N/A

|`jvm.threads.live` (Gauge)
|`jvm_threads_live_threads` (Gauge)
|`jvm.threads.live` (DoubleGauge)
|https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/semconv/runtime/jvm-metrics/#metric-jvmthreadcount[`jvm.threads.live`] (UpDownCounter)

|`jvm.threads.started` (FunctionCounter)
|`jvm_threads_started_threads_total` (Counter)
|`jvm.threads.started` (DoubleSum)
|https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/semconv/runtime/jvm-metrics/#metric-jvmthreadcount[`jvm.threads.live`] (UpDownCounter)

|`jvm.threads.daemon` (Gauge)
|`jvm_threads_daemon_threads` (Gauge)
|`jvm.threads.daemon` (DoubleGauge)
|https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/semconv/runtime/jvm-metrics/#metric-jvmthreadcount[`jvm.threads.live`] (UpDownCounter)

|`jvm.threads.peak` (Gauge)
|`jvm_threads_peak_threads` (Gauge)
|`jvm.threads.peak` (DoubleGauge)
|N/A

|`jvm.threads.states` (Gauge per state)
|`jvm_threads_states_threads` (Gauge)
|`jvm.threads.states` (DoubleGauge)
|https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/semconv/runtime/jvm-metrics/#metric-jvmthreadcount[`jvm.threads.live`] (UpDownCounter)
|===

[NOTE]
====

> - Some metrics might be absent of the output if they contain no data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Some metrics might be missing from the output if they contain no data.
```

////
This guide is maintained in the main Quarkus repository
and pull requests should be submitted there:
https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/tree/main/docs/src/main/asciidoc
////
[id=telemetry-micrometer-opentelemetry]
= Micrometer and OpenTelemetry extension
include::_attributes.adoc[]
:extension-status: preview
:diataxis-type: reference
:categories: observability
:summary: Guide to send Micrometer data to OpenTelemetry.
:topics: observability,opentelemetry,metrics,micrometer,tracing,logs
:extensions: io.quarkus:quarkus-micrometer-opentelemetry

> This extension provides support to both `Micrometer` and `OpenTelemetry` in Quarkus applications. It streamlines integration by incorporating both extensions along with a bridge that enables sending Micrometer metrics via OpenTelemetry.

Author: done

include::{includes}/extension-status.adoc[]

[NOTE]
====
- The xref:telemetry-micrometer.adoc[Micrometer Guide] is available for detailed information about the Micrometer extension.
- The xref:opentelemetry.adoc[OpenTelemetry Guide] provides information about the OpenTelemetry extension.
====

The extension allows the normal use of the Micrometer API, but have the metrics handled by the OpenTelemetry extension.

As an example, the `@Timed` annotation from Micrometer is used to measure the execution time of a method:

> ```java

Reviewer 2: Please use proper `[source]` blocks. There are more to adjust below.

Author: done

import io.micrometer.core.annotation.Timed;
//...
@Timed(name = "timer_metric")
public String timer() {
    return "OK";
}
```
The output telemetry data is handled by the OpenTelemetry SDK and sent by the `quarkus-opentelemetry` extension exporter using the OTLP protocol.

This reduces the overhead of having an independent Micrometer registry plus the OpenTelemetry SDK in memory for the same application when both `quarkus-micrometer` and `quarkus-opentelemetry` extensions are used independently.

> *The OpenTelemetry SDK will handle all metrics.* Either Micrometer metrics (manual or automatic) and OpenTelemetry Metrics can be used . All are available with this single extension.

Author: done

If you already have your Quarkus project configured, you can add the `quarkus-micrometer-opentelemetry` extension to your project by running the following command in your project base directory:

:add-extension-extensions: micrometer-opentelemetry
include::{includes}/devtools/extension-add.adoc[]

This will add the following to your build file:

[source,xml,role="primary asciidoc-tabs-target-sync-cli asciidoc-tabs-target-sync-maven"]
.pom.xml
----
<dependency>
    <groupId>io.quarkus</groupId>
    <artifactId>quarkus-micrometer-opentelemetry</artifactId>
</dependency>
----

[source,gradle,role="secondary asciidoc-tabs-target-sync-gradle"]
.build.gradle
----
implementation("io.quarkus:quarkus-micrometer-opentelemetry")
----

== Configuration

When the extension is present, Micrometer is enabled by default as are OpenTelemetry tracing, metrics and logs.

OpenTelemetry metrics auto-instrumentation for HTTP server and JVM metrics are disabled by default because those metrics can be  collected by Micrometer.

Specific automatic Micrometer metrics are all disabled by default and can be enabled by setting, for example in the case of JVM metrics:
```
quarkus.micrometer.binder.jvm=true
```

> on the `application.properties` file.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
in the `application.properties` file.
```

Author: done

For this and other properties you can use with the extension, Please refer to:

> * xref:telemetry-micrometer.adoc#configuration-reference[Micrometer metrics configurations]

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* xref:telemetry-micrometer.adoc#configuration-reference[Micrometer metrics configuration properties]
```

Author: done

> * xref:opentelemetry.adoc#configuration-reference[OpenTelemetry configurations]

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* xref:opentelemetry.adoc#configuration-reference[OpenTelemetry configuration properties]
```

Author: done

== Metric differences between Micrometer and OpenTelemetry

=== API differences
The metrics produced with each framework follow different APIs and the mapping is not 1:1.

One fundamental API difference is that Micrometer uses a https://docs.micrometer.io/micrometer/reference/concepts/timers.html[Timer] and OpenTelemetry uses a https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/otel/metrics/data-model/#histogram[Histogram] to record latency (execution time) metrics and the frequency of the events.

When using the `@Timed` annotation with Micrometer, 2 different metrics are https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-java-instrumentation/blob/324fdbdd452ddffaf2da2c5bf004d8bb3fdfa1dd/instrumentation/micrometer/micrometer-1.5/library/src/main/java/io/opentelemetry/instrumentation/micrometer/v1_5/OpenTelemetryTimer.java#L31[created on the OpenTelemetry side], one `Gauge` for the `max` value and one `Histogram`.

> The `DistributionSummary` from Micrometer is transformed into a `histogram` and a `DoubleGauge` for the `max` value. If service level objectives (slo) are set to `true` when creating a `DistributionSummary`, an additional histogram is created for them.

Reviewer 2: Not entirely sure but seems consistent with above:

```suggestion
The `DistributionSummary` from Micrometer is transformed into a `Histogram` and a `DoubleGauge` for the `max` value. If service level objectives (slo) are set to `true` when creating a `DistributionSummary`, an additional histogram is created for them.
```

This table shows the differences between the two frameworks:

|===
|Micrometer |OpenTelemetry

|DistributionSummary
|`<Metric name>` (Histogram), `<Metric name>.max` (DoubleGauge)

|DistributionSummary with SLOs
|`<Metric name>` (Histogram), `<Metric name>.max` (DoubleGauge), `<Metric name>.histogram` (DoubleGauge)

|LongTaskTimer
|`<Metric name>.active` (ObservableLongUpDownCounter), `<Metric name>.duration` (ObservableDoubleUpDownCounter)

|Timer
|`<Metric name>` (Histogram), `<Metric name>.max` (ObservableDoubleGauge)
|===

=== Semantic convention differences

> The 2 frameworks follow different semantic conventions. The OpenTelemetry Metrics are based on the https://opentelemetry.io/docs/concepts/semantic-conventions/[`OpenTelemetry Semantic Conventions`] and are still under active development (early 2025). Micrometer metrics convention format is around for a long time and has not changed much.

Reviewer 2: Let's avoid using backticks for things that don't really need them.

```suggestion
The 2 frameworks follow different semantic conventions. The OpenTelemetry Metrics are based on the https://opentelemetry.io/docs/concepts/semantic-conventions/[OpenTelemetry Semantic Conventions] and are still under active development (early 2025). Micrometer metrics convention format is around for a long time and has not changed much.
```

When these 2 configurations are set in the `application.properties` file:

```
quarkus.micrometer.binder.jvm=true
quarkus.micrometer.binder.http-server.enabled=true

```
The JVM and HTTP server metrics are collected by Micrometer.

> Next, are examples of the metrics collected by Micrometer and a comparison of what would be the `quarkus-micrometer-registry-prometheus` output vs the one on this bridge. A link to the equivalent OpenTelemetry Semantic Convention is also provided for reference and is not currently used in the bridge.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Next, are examples of the metrics collected by Micrometer and a comparison of what would be the `quarkus-micrometer-registry-prometheus` output vs the one of this bridge. A link to the equivalent OpenTelemetry Semantic Convention is also provided for reference and is not currently used in the bridge.
```

Author: I'll keep my version if you don't mind.

|`http.server.connections.active` (LongSum), `http.server.connections.duration` (DoubleGauge)
| N/A

|`jvm.threads.live` (Gauge)
|`jvm_threads_live_threads` (Gauge)
|`jvm.threads.live` (DoubleGauge)
|https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/semconv/runtime/jvm-metrics/#metric-jvmthreadcount[`jvm.threads.live`] (UpDownCounter)

|`jvm.threads.started` (FunctionCounter)
|`jvm_threads_started_threads_total` (Counter)
|`jvm.threads.started` (DoubleSum)
|https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/semconv/runtime/jvm-metrics/#metric-jvmthreadcount[`jvm.threads.live`] (UpDownCounter)

|`jvm.threads.daemon` (Gauge)
|`jvm_threads_daemon_threads` (Gauge)
|`jvm.threads.daemon` (DoubleGauge)
|https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/semconv/runtime/jvm-metrics/#metric-jvmthreadcount[`jvm.threads.live`] (UpDownCounter)

|`jvm.threads.peak` (Gauge)
|`jvm_threads_peak_threads` (Gauge)
|`jvm.threads.peak` (DoubleGauge)
|N/A

|`jvm.threads.states` (Gauge per state)
|`jvm_threads_states_threads` (Gauge)
|`jvm.threads.states` (DoubleGauge)
|https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/semconv/runtime/jvm-metrics/#metric-jvmthreadcount[`jvm.threads.live`] (UpDownCounter)
|===

[NOTE]
====

> - Some metrics might be missing from the output if they contain no data.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Some metrics might be missing from the output if they contain no data.
```

====

== See the output

=== Grafana-OTel-LGTM Dev Service

> You can use the xref:observability-devservices-lgtm.adoc[Grafana-OTel-LGTM] devservice.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can use the xref:observability-devservices-lgtm.adoc[Grafana-OTel-LGTM] Dev Service.
```

> This Dev service includes a Grafana for visualizing data, Loki to store logs, Tempo to store traces and Prometheus to store metrics.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This Dev Service includes Grafana for visualizing data, Loki to store logs, Tempo to store traces and Prometheus to store metrics.
```

> Also provides and OTel collector to receive the data.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It also provides an OTel collector to receive the data.
```
